## How and why do the gut microbiomes of sister species of _Phanaeus_ dung beetles differ across their ranges?
### Claire Winfrey
### Introduction:  
For my independent project in Computational Biology, my overarching goals are to employ some of the skills that we have learned to add a new analysis to one of my datasets and to make existing analyses more reproducible and transparent. My hope is that doing so will not only make my paper more likely to be accepted for publication in a peer-reviewed journal, but that it will also lead to more robust and reproducible results. 

### Summary of Data to be Analyzed
#### Goals of the original study and brief desciption of methodology
The dataset comes from a paper titled "Drivers of interpopulation variation in the gut microbiomes of sister species of *Phanaeus* dung beetles", which is available as a pre-print [here](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.19.431932v1). The motivating question of this study is: Does the microbiome of animals vary across their ranges, and if so, what abiotic and biotic factors are contributing to these patterns? To ask these questions, I sampled two sister species of dung beetles which have maternally-transmitted gut microbiomes, *Phanaeus vindex* and *Phanaeus difformis*, from populations across their ranges where they co-occur (are sympatric) and where they are not found together (are allopatric). I then dissected out the whole guts of each beetle, extracted the DNA in each gut, amplified the DNA using universal bacterial/archaeal primers, and then sequenced the amplicon libraries on an Illumina MiSeq. I processed raw sequence data with the platform QIIME2, utilizing various bioinformatic tools available in QIIME2 as detailed in the pre-print. Then, I imported my processed sequence data in R for rarefaction, statistical analysis, and data visualization. For my existing analyses, I considered how range overlap (sympatry or allopatry), distances among populations, and a variety of abiotic factors explained the variation in the gut microbial communities that I observed.

There are four data objects which together constitute the "data". 
1.  **Amplicon sequence variant (ASV) table**. An ASVis roughly analogous to a bacterial or archaeal species, and the ASV table provides the numbers of each bacterial/archaeal "species" that were found in each individual beetle gut. The ASV table is an .csv file and is 14.5 MB. 
2. **Taxonomy table**. This file, also a .csv file, links each identifier represented in the ASV table to that bacterial or archaeal taxon's taxonomic classification. Different taxonomic levels, ranging from kingdom to species, are included as known for that ASV. This file is 4.4 MB.
3. **Metadata file** The metadata, also a .csv file, provides useful informational about each individual beetle, e.g. its mass, the population that it came from, whether is was *P. vindex* or *P. difformis*, etc. This file is 36 KB.
4. **Phylogenetic tree** This file, which is in Newick Tree format (.nwk extension) provides the phylogenetic relationships between all ASVs in the dataset. This file is 16.8 GB. 

Each of these files was pre-cleaned in QIIME2. 

### Detailed Description of Analysis to be Done and Challenges Involved
For the substance of the project, I plan to re-run several analyses and conduct a new analysis. I describe each task in more detail below:

1. **Indicator species analyses** In my original analysis, I performed indicator species analyses, using a package called "indicspecies" and a function called `multipatt()`. This analysis takes the ASV table (as described above) and estimates group-equalized, point-biserial correlation coefficients between each ASV and different groupings of individual beetles, ultimately providing ASVs that are indicative of a certain category of beetle. In my original analyses, I looked at ASVs that were associated with beetles found in habitats with varying amounts of cattle, as well as ASVs that were associated with *P. vindex* and *P. difformis* in sympatry or in allopatry. While the function worked as expected, it only provided the ASV identifiers for ASVs associated with each grouping. These identifiers do not give the taxonomic information, which is the biologically-relevant information. What I did (I am ashamed to say now!) is I looked up each one of these ASV identifiers, one by one, in Excel, using the taxonomy file. I also hand-calculated the relative abundance of each ASV  (about 100) in each grouping by hand in Excel. While I checked these three times, this is obviously not a very reproducible approach and is clearly error prone. The challenge that I propose is to write a function which engages both the Taxonomy file and the ASV table, as well as calculates relative abundance.
2. **Plots using ggplot** In my pre-print, 7 of my figures were not made using ggplot. I will re-make 6 of these (those that I plan to keep in the main body of the paper) using ggplot, which will be a significant challenge given that 5 out of 6 are multivariate ordination plots with points on each axis determined by eigenvectors.
3. **Unweighted UniFrac analysis** In my pre-print, I used two abundance-based dissimilarity matrices to describe the differences in communities of bacteria and archaea among beetles, quantitative Jaccard and weighted UniFrac. UniFrac dissimilarity matrices take the phylogenetic relationships of ASVs in each beetle into account when tabulating the pair-wise "distances" of beetle gut communities, whereas Jaccard is phylogenetically-blind. I will add in a presence/absence measure of diversity, unweighted UniFrac. While there is already a function to calculate unweighted UniFrac in the package "phyloseq", making new plots to show differences among beetles based on this dissimilarity index will be a new challenge.
4. **Finally, for all of the challenges above, I will use tools from the tidyverse whenever possible.**

While my main questions about how and why the gut microbiome of *Phanaeus* dung beetles vary were addressed in the analyses that I used in my pre-print, the additions described above will make my code more reproducible and my figures more visually appealing. Furthermore, the function that I create could be useful for future researchers conducting indicator species analyses. Finally, by adding an unweighted UniFrac analysis, I will have a better understanding of if my results are driven by the weight given to sample proportions or to the the presence/absence of phylogenetic signal in my community data.


### References
Winfrey, C.C. & Sheldon, K.S. (2021). Drivers of interpopulation variation in the gut microbiomes of sister species of *Phanaeus* dung beetles. *bioRxiv*. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.19.431932

Winfrey, C.C. & Sheldon, K.S. (2021) Data from: Drivers of interpopulation variation in the gut microbiomes of sister species of *Phanaeus* dung beetles. NCBI GenBank, BioProject ID: [PRJNA706782](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/?term=PRJNA706782)
